The real power of segmentation in Google Analytics comes from custom segments.
Custom segments can also be based on characteristics such
as desktop users or users outside the United States.
You can base your segments on
overall user behavior such as sessions without transactions.
You can also base custom segments on custom dimensions.
One example of a custom dimension was customer loyalty from the back-end.
You can certainly take a customer loyalty values such as
platinum and use that to define a custom segment.
Let's see how we could define some of these custom segments.
Previously, we applied the mobile traffic segment to the landing pages report.
But what if we wanted to compare the mobile traffic segment to,
say, the desktop traffic segment?
Comparing segments is a valuable technique.
So, let's see how we can do that.
We'll click Add Segment.
We can add up to four segments to a single report at a time.
We'll click System. Interestingly, we don't see desktop defined as a system segment.
But no problem, we can create a custom segment for desktop sessions.
There are a few ways to define a segment.
One way is to start with a segment that's already defined or built-in.
Click Copy. We'll call this segment Desktop Traffic.
All we have to do is change the definition to device category exactly matches desktop.
Save. Now we have both segments applied to the landing pages report.
Now we can compare metrics for each landing page segmented both for mobile and desktop,
and we could see where there are differences.
One observation that we could already make is that the bounce rate is considerably
lower for mobile traffic than desktop traffic on the YouTube shot by brand page.
So, we might want to check out that user experience to see if
there's some way that we could maybe improve the experience on desktop.
On the other hand, for the accessories page,
we see that the bounce rate is much higher on mobile than on desktop.
So, there's potentially an opportunity for optimization there as well.
Let's now go to the channels report and create another custom segment.
We'll click Add Segment.
We'll deselect all users.
Let's actually start by going to system segments.
We can select sessions with transactions as a built-in segment.
But notice there's not a direct counterpart sessions without transactions.
So, what we can do is copy this segment.
We'll call this segment Sessions without Transaction.
They're often a couple of ways to define the same segment.
In this case, we could invert the segment by selecting exclude,
or we could change transactions per session equals zero.
Let's save the segment. Now we have sessions with
transactions and sessions without transaction applied as segments.
Notice that the user count doesn't add up quite to 100.
That's okay because the segments are defined at session scope.
So, the same users can actually appear in the different segments.
But we can certainly still use these segments for comparison.
To make this comparison clearer,
we'll switch over to the percentage display.
We can readily see big differences in
the representation of the different channels in the two segments.
We see, for instance, that referral traffic is very well represented in sessions with
transactions and social traffic is
disproportionately represented in sessions without transaction.
Let's go ahead and click into both and get more detail.
Now drill down into referral,
knowing that this channel is already performing better as sessions with transactions.
We could see which specific referrals are helping this channel the
most if we go back up to the top level of the report.
Now drill down into social which is
over-represented in sessions without transaction. We see the culprit.
It's our YouTube traffic that's generating very few transactions.
So, there's possibly the beginning of an optimization conversation there.
In the case of these segments,
we've used the user's own behavior to create segments that we can
then wrap back around onto other reports such as the channels report.
As a special note,
when Patrick and I discuss attribution in an upcoming course,
we'll do some further digging to determine if any of
the traffic sources that seemed to be under-performing in
terms of conversion rate are in fact still
helping conversions that occur in later sessions.
For now, let's consider a few more aspects of custom segments.
Custom segments are retroactive.
They don't alter any underlying report data.
You don't have to hesitate to create them,
and it's fine if you create them right away in your main reporting view.
You do not have to try your segments out in the test view first.
Segments are also yours only by default.
No one else will see your custom segments unless you
change the visibility from the default setting.
If we go back into edit sessions without transaction,
we see that the default visibility is that I can apply
or edit this segment in any view that I have access to.
I can change the setting for the segment to be applicable in this view only.
I don't have collaborate access to this Google Merchandise Store view.
But if I did, the segment availability panel would look like this,
with an additional option to share
the segment with other users who are accessing the view.
Tumeris will be talking more about access rights in the next lesson.